Speaking of modern features, here is one we'll actually use in our course project, CSS variables.
Now what does this mean?
Consider this case; we get CSS code where we get different selectors and let's say they share some common
functionality, like a color which you reuse.
This could also be some unit though, this could be something like 1rem which you use again and again,
CSS variables are a relatively new feature which allow you to put that reused value into a variable
which you defined with this strange looking syntax, --my-color.
Now this is a property which kind of exists, the browser understands that this now should become a custom
variable and then you can reuse that variable with that var function.
Also note that the variable here is defined in that root pseudo selector, which in the end refers to
the entire document or to every element, you could also place it on a specific element selector
but then this variable would only be usable within that selector.
So with the snippet you see here, you define it once and you can use it everywhere in your document, everywhere
on your page.
And there also is a special syntax which you see at the very bottom where we provide a second value,
this is a fallback value in case the variable is not defined yet.
Be aware, this is not a fallback value for browsers which don't support variables because they won't
even understand the var function,
this really is just a fallback for cases where you reference a variable and for some reason, it isn't
set yet,
maybe because you forgot to import some other file where you defined it,
then this fallback value will kick in,
not in browsers which don't support variables. Speaking of browser support, if we check
caniuse for CSS variables,
we see that browser support is generally pretty good but Internet Explorer doesn't support it at all.
So if you also need support Internet Explorer and chances are you do, at least version 11, then
you can't use variables, you can't use CSS variables.
If you don't need to do that, they are a real alternative though
and in the future of course, when the usage of Internet Explorer becomes less and less, variables
become more of an option.
Now let's see them in action in
our project. Back in our project, if we open the shared.css file, we see a couple of values that we repeat
all over again.
Well actually, I'm not going to replace everything with CSS variables,
this is something you can definitely do though
but I want to focus on colors.
Be aware that you could use them for units like rem and so on too
but we can already see that we reused colors, for example in that shared.css file if we scroll
through it from top to bottom,
this red color,
we're using it twice here already.
and if we scroll down further, we see that we also reuse that green color,
so here, we can also see that.
So it sounds like a good idea to put that green color and that red color into a CSS variable, now
let's do that. All the way at the top,
even above that universal selector, I'll add my root pseudo selector. Again, this selects the entire document.
In that root selector, we can now add a variable with this special syntax you learned, by adding two dashes,
now this is important
and then the name of your variable, for example dark-green.
Now that name is totally up to you,
you then add a colon and then your value, like this dark green.
Now this variable is defined and we can reuse it by that name.
Now let's also put that red color into such a variable, so
let's grab that hex code,
scroll up to the root selector again and then maybe highlight color and use that color.
Now of course, you might bring these names more into line,
I'm using different names deliberately to really highlight and emphasize that you can use different names,
that you can use custom names and name this however you want
and now with that, we have these variables defined.
Now of course, we want to use them. Now to use them,
let's start with the green one maybe, dark green and let's search the occurrences of this dark green
color.
If we scroll down, here we see on the button we use it as a background,
we now use it with a special var function.
Here we simply add the name and we can add this as a fallback so that it uses this color in cases where
somehow dark green is not set, here
this is not required because we do set it at the top but this is how you could specify such a fallback.
This is mostly interesting if you work with third-party packages that provide some variables where you
might not be sure if it's defined or not.
So here I'll repeat that, this time without the fallback because as I said, we don't need it,
so use the var function here and use it down here where we got a color too.
Now the other function, the other color I should say we have is the highlight color,
so let's grab that too
and let's search the occurrences of that color in our code,
here we are
and there, I'll again use the var function, enter the variable name and we're done
and the same down here where we also use that color. With that if we scroll through, that should be all
occurrences of these colors.
Now if we save that and we reload, we see no difference
and that is a good thing because that means that it works,
we shouldn't see a difference here,
we do style everything with variable successfully.
We can see that if we inspect our call to action button here for example, there you can see that for
the background, we got our highlight color and if we uncheck this, the background is gone,
so this really seems to work.
I can also see that there seems to be some leftover color,
here it is,
so maybe here for that color in our shared file still, we should also use var
and then here it's dark-green.
Now if we save that and we reload, then we can see that there we also got our dark green color.
Now here, it's actually overwritten for that start hosting button
but for the other elements, here we can see it's having an effect.
So this how we can use CSS variables, later in this course when we dive into SASS, a preprocessor for
CSS, we'll see an alternative to this
but here we already got a nice feature which we can use to save ourselves some time because the clear
advantage of the CSS variables is that we define them once and if we ever decide to change this color,
we only need to do it in one place and the same of course if we were to define a font size or something
like this here, we only need change it once and it will automatically be updated in the entire document,
that's the great advantage.
The disadvantage is the browser support
as I mentioned, right now,
Internet Explorer doesn't support it,
so that might be a reason why you can't use them yet but in the future, this will be really great.